---
title:  PhD Thesis Abstract
author: Michael Malick
date:   2016-12-10
tags:   phd
---






---

I show that the phenology of the spring phytoplankton bloom and the positioning
and strength of the North Pacific Current are strongly associated with changes
in productivity. However, the direction (spring bloom) and
magnitude (currents) of the estimated effects were dependent on the latitude
of juvenile salmon ocean entry with northern salmon populations (Alaska)
responding differently than southern salmon populations (British Columbia and
Washington).

An early
spring bloom was associated with higher productivity for Alaska salmon
populations and lower productivity for British Columbia salmon populations.

I begin by investigating specific components of two alternative environmental
forcing pathways.

These results suggest that

I show that the phenology of the spring phytoplankton bloom (and to a lesser
extent phytoplankton biomass) is strongly associated with changes in salmon
productivity, although the direction of the effect was dependent on the
geographic location of juvenile salmon ocean entry. Next, I again use a
cross-system comparative approach to examine an alternative hypothesis that
horizontal ocean transport is a critical driver of Pacific salmon productivity.
I show that horizontal ocean transport can strongly affect salmon productivity
for stocks in Washington and British Columbia, but not for more northern stocks
in Alaska, suggesting that a different mechanism may underlie changes in
productivity for salmon stocks in this region.

- BN and indirect effects

- Abrupt and persistent shifts in demographic rates of exploited marine fish
  species in response to environmental variability

- demonstrate
- drivers governing
- environmental drivers


# Intro

* A central problem in fisheries science is understanding how environmental
  forcing influences demographic rates of marine and anadromous fish
  populations.

A central problem in fisheries science is understanding how environmental
forcing influences demographic rates of marine and anadromous fish populations.

Yet, large uncertainties about population-level responses to environmental
drivers

Yet, large uncertainties about population-level responses to changing
environmental conditions continues


Yet, critical uncertainties about the response of fish populations to changes in environmental conditions

Critical uncertainties about the effects of environmental forcing on
economically important living marine resources

Yet, deep uncertainties about the coupling among climate systems, physical and
biological ocean processes, and productivity of higher-trophic-level species
limits our ability to anticipate or quickly detect impacts of changing
environmental conditions on commercially valuable species.


# Policy

I show that mismatches in the scale at
which ecosystem services are provided by Pacific salmon and the scale at which
human activities and natural processes impact those services need to be
explicitly accounted for ecosystem-based management policies.


I show that uncertainties


I show that mismatches in the scale at which ecosystem services are provided by
Pacific salmon and the scale at which natural and anthropogenic forcing
impact those services strongly contribute to the barriers
preventing more effective integration. I further suggest two potential
strategies to enhance integration of Pacific salmon into ecosystem-based
management policies including creation of an international ecosystem synthesis
group to facilitate the synthesis of information across multiple spatial scales
and the expanded
use of dynamic in-season management policies that allow rapid updating of
management decisions based on evolving information about ecosystem conditions.

more effective integration and

Finally, I use a policy perspective to examine potential strategies to more
effectively integrate Pacific salmon into ecosystem-based management policies.


show that mismatches in the scale at
which ecosystem services are provided by Pacific salmon and the scale at which
human activities and natural processes impact those services need to be
explicitly accounted for ecosystem-based management policies.

# NPC
I show that the positioning and strength of the North Pacific Current is

ocean currents in the Northeast
Pacific

I show that the positioning and strength of ocean currents in the Northeast
Pacific can strongly affect salmon productivity, however, the magnitude of the
estimated effects were
dependent on the latitude of juvenile salmon ocean entry with the strongest
effects being observed for for stocks in Washington and
British Columbia,

for stocks in Washington and
British Columbia, but not for more northern stocks in Alaska, suggesting that a
different mechanism may underlie changes in productivity for salmon stocks in
this region.


# Other

In coastal Northeast Pacific ecosystems, the effects of climate variability
on the dynamics of higher-trophic-level species are often hypothesized to be
mediated by either vertical or horizontal ocean transport processes.

Vertical ocean transport processes (e.g., upwelling) can influence
higher-trophic-level species by altering phytoplankton dynamics in coastal
ecosystems and subsequently, food resource availability for higher-trophic-level
species. Horizontal ocean transport processes (e.g., ocean currents) can
influence the dynamics of higher-trophic-level species in coastal ecosystems by
altering either physical oceanographic conditions or the advection of food
resources into coastal areas.

In this thesis, I examine potential environmental forcing pathways linking
climatic and ocean processes to dynamics of Pacific salmon
(\textit{Oncorhynchus} spp.) populations in the Northeast Pacific Ocean.


In coastal ecosystems, two sets of environmental forcing pathways are often
hypothesized to link climate variability and dynamics of higher-trophic-level
species.

I begin by using a cross-system comparative approach to assess the evidence for
population-level responses to inter-annual changes in two meso-scale ocean
processes, phytoplankton dynamics and ocean current patterns.

I show that the phenology of the spring phytoplankton bloom (and to a lesser
extent phytoplankton biomass) is strongly associated with changes in salmon
productivity, although the direction of the effect was dependent on the
geographic location of juvenile salmon ocean entry.

Next, I show that the positioning and strength of ocean currents in the
Northeast Pacific can strongly affect salmon productivity for stocks in
Washington and British Columbia, but not for more northern stocks in Alaska,
suggesting that a different mechanism may underlie changes in productivity for
salmon stocks in this region.


First, vertical ocean transport (e.g., upwelling) can influence the
higher-trophic-level species by altering phytoplankton dynamics in coastal
ecosystems and subsequently, food resource availability for higher-trophic-level
species.

Second, horizontal ocean transport can influence the dynamics of
higher-trophic-level species in coastal ecosystems by altering either physical
oceanographic conditions or the advection of food resources into coastal areas.

---


that are thought to mediate the effects of climate variability on
higher-trophic-level species.

First, I examine the hypothesis that processes driven by vertical ocean
transport in general, and phytoplankton dynamics in particular,

I first examine

In particular, two alternative hypotheses have been suggested about how ocean
processes mediate the effects of climate variability on higher-trophic-level
species. First,

---


Unprecedented changes in climate systems over the past few decades and
subsequent changes in marine ecosystems including shifts in phenology, species
distributions, and fish stock productivity, highlight the importance of this
understanding.


In this thesis, I examine environmental forcing pathways linking climatic and
ocean processes to dynamics of Pacific salmon (\textit{Oncorhynchus} spp.)
populations in the Northeast Pacific Ocean. I begin by using a cross-system
comparative approach to assess the evidence for population-level responses to
inter-annual changes in two

# Draft 1

A central problem in fisheries science is understanding how environmental
forcing influences demographic rates of marine and anadromous fish populations.
In this thesis, I examine potential environmental forcing pathways linking
climatic and ocean processes to dynamics of Pacific salmon
(\textit{Oncorhynchus} spp.) populations in the Northeast Pacific Ocean. I begin
by using a cross-system comparative approach to assess the evidence for
population-level responses to inter-annual changes in phytoplankton dynamics. I
show that the phenology of the spring phytoplankton bloom (and to a lesser
extent phytoplankton biomass) is strongly associated with changes in salmon
productivity, although the direction of the effect was dependent on the
geographic location of juvenile salmon ocean entry. Next, I again use a
cross-system comparative approach to examine an alternative hypothesis that
horizontal ocean transport is a critical driver of Pacific salmon productivity.
I show that horizontal ocean transport can strongly affect salmon productivity
for stocks in Washington and British Columbia, but not for more northern stocks
in Alaska, suggesting that a different mechanism may underlie changes in
productivity for salmon stocks in this region. Next, I use a novel quantitative
method, probabilistic networks, to examine the cumulative effects and relative
importance of multiple environmental pathways on salmon dynamics. I show that
multiple environmental pathways can simultaneously impact salmon population
dynamics, including multiple pathways that originate from the same climatic
process. Finally, I use a policy perspective to show that mismatches in the
scale at which ecosystem services are provided by Pacific salmon and the scale
at which human activities and natural processes impact those services need to be
explicitly accounted for ecosystem-based management policies. My thesis
demonstrates that climatic and ocean processes can impact higher-trophic-level
species via simultaneously operating environmental pathways---including pathways
mediated by either vertical or horizontal ocean transport---and that the
relative importance of these pathways can be non-stationary through space.

# Draft 2

Rapid environmental change from natural or anthropogenic forcing can have
profound impacts on the structure and function of marine and coastal ecosystems.
Yet, determining environmental drivers governing shifts in demographic rates of
commercially valuable fish species remains an elusive problem that has practical
management implications. In this thesis, I use a cross-system comparative
approach to examine environmental forcing pathways linking climatic and ocean
processes to dynamics of Pacific salmon (\textit{Oncorhynchus} spp.) populations
in the Northeast Pacific Ocean. I begin by investigating the vertical ocean
transport hypothesis, which suggests that vertical ocean transport processes
(e.g., upwelling) mediate the effects of climate variability on Pacific salmon
by altering phytoplankton dynamics in coastal ecosystems and subsequently, food
resource availability for juvenile Pacific salmon. I show that the phenology of
the spring phytoplankton bloom (and to a lesser extent phytoplankton biomass) is
strongly associated with inter-annual changes in salmon productivity. The
direction of the effect, however, was dependent on the latitude of juvenile
salmon ocean entry; an early spring bloom was associated with higher
productivity for Alaska salmon populations and lower productivity for British
Columbia salmon populations. Next, I assess the evidence for an alternative
hypothesis, which suggests horizontal ocean transport processes (e.g., ocean
currents) also mediate the effects of climate variability on Pacific salmon by
altering either physical oceanographic conditions or the advection of food
resources into coastal areas. I show that for salmon stocks located in
Washington and British Columbia, variability in both the positioning and
strength of the North Pacific Current are strongly associated with changes in
productivity. In contrast, I show much weaker effects of horizontal ocean
transport on productivity of salmon stocks in Alaska, suggesting that a
different mechanism may underlie changes in productivity for salmon stocks in
this region. Next, I use a novel quantitative method, probabilistic networks, to
examine the joint effect and relative strength of 17 potential environmental
pathways linking large-scale climate processes to Pacific salmon dynamics. I
show that among the pathways considered, pathways originating with the Pacific
Decadal Oscillation are the most influential on Pacific salmon dynamics with a
joint effect considerably larger than that of the pathways originating with
other large-scale climate processes. Finally, I use a policy perspective to
examine how challenges arising from a highly migratory life history, imperfect
information, and ecosystem complexity can impede efforts to integrate Pacific
salmon into ecosystem-based management policies. My findings indicate that
ecosystem-based management policies need to explicitly account for mismatches in
the scale at which ecosystem services are provided by highly migratory species
and the scale at which human activities and natural processes impact those
services in order to achieve more effective integration. Collectively, my thesis
demonstrates that climatic and ocean processes can impact higher-trophic-level
species via simultaneously operating environmental pathways---including pathways
mediated by either vertical or horizontal ocean transport---and that the
relative importance of these pathways can be non-stationary through space.

# Draft 3

Rapid environmental change from natural or anthropogenic forcing can have
profound impacts on the structure and function of marine and coastal ecosystems.
Yet, determining environmental drivers governing shifts in demographic rates of
commercially valuable fish species remains an elusive problem that has practical
management implications. In this thesis, I use a cross-system comparative
approach to examine environmental forcing pathways linking climatic and ocean
processes to dynamics of Pacific salmon (\textit{Oncorhynchus} spp.) populations
in the Northeast Pacific Ocean. I begin by assessing the evidence for
population-level responses to inter-annual changes in two meso-scale ocean
processes, phytoplankton dynamics and ocean currents, which represent links
within two alternative environmental forcing pathways. In the first pathway,
vertical ocean transport processes (e.g., upwelling) are hypothesized to mediate
the effects of climate variability on Pacific salmon by altering phytoplankton
dynamics in coastal ecosystems and subsequently, food resource availability for
juvenile Pacific salmon. In the second pathway, horizontal ocean transport
processes (e.g., ocean currents) are hypothesized to mediate the effects of
climate variability on Pacific salmon by altering the advection of food
resources into coastal areas. I show that both phytoplankton dynamics and ocean
current patterns are strongly associated with changes in salmon productivity.
However, the magnitude and direction of the effects are dependent on the
latitude of juvenile salmon ocean entry with northern salmon populations (i.e.,
Alaska) and southern populations (i.e., British Columbia and Washington)
responding differently to changes in the meso-scale ocean processes. This
suggests that different mechanism may underlie changes in productivity for
salmon stocks in northern and southern areas. Next, I use a novel quantitative
method, probabilistic networks, to examine the joint effect and relative
strength of 17 potential environmental pathways linking large-scale climate
processes to Pacific salmon dynamics. I show that multiple environmental
pathways can simultaneously impact salmon population dynamics, including
multiple pathways originating from the same climatic process. Finally, I use
a policy perspective to examine how challenges arising from a highly migratory
life history can impede efforts to integrate Pacific salmon into ecosystem-based
management policies. My findings indicate that ecosystem-based management
policies should explicitly account for mismatches in the scale at which
ecosystem services are provided by highly migratory species and the scale at
which human activities and natural processes impact those services in order to
achieve more effective integration. Collectively, my thesis demonstrates that
climatic and ocean processes can impact higher-trophic-level species via
simultaneously operating environmental pathways---including pathways mediated by
either vertical or horizontal ocean transport---and that the relative importance
of these pathways can be non-stationary through space.


# Draft 4

Environmental change resulting from natural or anthropogenic forcing can have
profound impacts on the structure and function of marine and coastal ecosystems.
Yet, determining environmental processes governing population dynamics of marine
and anadromous fish species remains an elusive problem that has practical
management implications. In this thesis, I use a cross-system comparative
approach to examine environmental forcing pathways linking climatic and ocean
processes to dynamics of Pacific salmon (\textit{Oncorhynchus} spp.) populations
in the Northeast Pacific Ocean. I begin by assessing the evidence for
population-level responses to inter-annual changes in two meso-scale ocean
processes, phytoplankton dynamics and ocean currents, which represent critical
links within two alternative sets of environmental forcing pathways. In the
first set of pathways, vertical ocean transport (e.g., upwelling) is
hypothesized to mediate the effects of large-scale climate variability on
higher-trophic-level species by altering primary and secondary production. In
contrast, in the second set of pathways, horizontal ocean transport (e.g., ocean
currents) is hypothesized to mediate climate variability by altering the
advection of food resources into coastal areas. I show that both phytoplankton
dynamics and ocean current patterns are strongly associated with changes in
salmon productivity, suggesting that both sets of alternative pathways may drive
salmon dynamics. However, the magnitude and direction of the effects were
conditional on the latitude of juvenile salmon ocean entry, suggesting that the
relative importance of different environmental pathways may be region dependent.
Next, I use a novel quantitative method, probabilistic networks, to examine the
joint effect and relative strength of 17 potential environmental pathways
linking large-scale climate processes to Pacific salmon dynamics. I show that
multiple environmental pathways can simultaneously impact salmon population
dynamics, including multiple pathways originating from the same climatic
process. Finally, I use a policy perspective to examine how challenges arising
from a highly migratory life history can impede efforts to integrate Pacific
salmon into ecosystem-based management policies. My findings indicate that
ecosystem-based management policies should explicitly account for mismatches in
the scale at which ecosystem services are provided by highly migratory species
and the scale at which human activities and natural processes impact those
services in order to achieve more effective integration. Collectively, my thesis
demonstrates that climatic and ocean processes can impact higher-trophic-level
species via simultaneously operating environmental pathways---including pathways
mediated by either vertical or horizontal ocean transport---and that the
relative importance of these pathways can be non-stationary through space.

