<!--
General Discussion
Michael Malick
2016-12-09
-->


# Summary and general conclusions

In this thesis, I have sought to contribute to our knowledge of how
environmental forcing pathways link climatic and ocean processes to dynamics of
Pacific salmon populations in the Northeast Pacific Ocean. My second and third
chapters apply a cross-system comparative approach to rigorously assess the
evidence for population responses to inter-annual changes in two meso-scale
ocean processes. In chapter 2, I investigate the hypothesis that coastal
phytoplankton dynamics, which are primarily controlled by vertical ocean
transport mechanisms, are associated with changes in Pacific salmon
productivity. In chapter 3, I examine an alternative hypothesis that suggests
ocean processes driven by horizontal ocean transport, such as the advection
of zooplankton, are equally important drivers of salmon productivity as
processes driven by vertical ocean transport. My fourth chapter builds on the
previous chapters, which each focused on a single meso-scale ocean process, by
exploring the cumulative effects and relative importance of multiple
environmental pathways on Pacific salmon dynamics. My fifth chapter applies an
interdisciplinary approach to examine challenges to integrating highly-migratory
anadromous fish species into place-based ecosystem-based management policies and
provides practical recommendations for overcoming the identified challenges. In
total, this thesis further develops our quantitative understanding about how
climatic and ocean processes influence the population dynamics of Pacific salmon
and in doing so contributes to reducing uncertainties about how environmental
change impacts living marine resources.

My thesis makes two substantive contributions to our understanding of how
broad-scale climate processes downscale to affect regional- and local-scale
dynamics of higher-trophic-level species. First, my thesis provides evidence
that the dynamics of higher-trophic-level species respond to forcing from
multiple concurrent environmental pathways. In chapters two and three, I show
that environmental forcing pathways mediated by either vertical or horizontal
ocean transport processes can impact the dynamics of higher-trophic-level
species. Although I investigate effects of phytoplankton dynamics and ocean
currents on salmon productivity individually, these meso-scale ocean processes
likely influence higher-trophic-levels species simultaneously. Indeed, my fourth
chapter indicates that large-scale climate processes can impact Pacific salmon
year-class strength via multiple simultaneously operating environmental
pathways. For instance, large-scale climate variability indexed by the Pacific
Decadal Oscillation can propagate to affect regional and local scale dynamics of
Pacific salmon through concurrent pathways that are mediated by different ocean
processes. This implies that only considering a single mechanism may be
insufficient to understand how environmental forcing impacts living marine
resources.

Second, my thesis provides evidence that effects of environmental forcing on
higher-trophic-level species can be non-stationary across space. My second and
third chapters indicated that effects of the spring bloom initiation date and
horizontal ocean transport on salmon productivity were dependent on the latitude
of juvenile salmon ocean entry. For example, in chapter 2 I show that effects of
the spring bloom initiation date on pink salmon productivity were opposite in
sign for stocks that enter the ocean south and north of 55.7Â°N. Similarly, in
chapter 3 my results indicate that ocean current patterns are strongly
associated with changes in salmon productivity for stocks that enter the ocean
in the southern Northeast Pacific upwelling domain, but not for stocks that
enter the ocean in the northern downwelling domain, suggesting that different
environmental pathways may drive salmon productivity in northern and southern
areas. A practical implication of this spatial non-stationarity is that
relationships inferred from data in one location may not be applicable to
another location.

Collectively, my thesis highlights the need to pursue evidence for multiple
competing hypotheses to explain observed spatial and temporal changes in
demographic rates of exploited species. Over a century ago, T.C. Chamberlin
warned that "We [scientists] are so prone to attribute a phenomenon to a single
cause, that, when we find an agency present, we are liable to rest satisfied
therewith, and fail to recognize that it is but one factor, and perchance a
minor factor, in the accomplishment of the total result" [@Chamberlin1965]. Yet,
broadening our focus beyond a single hypothesis or set of hypotheses focused
around a single mechanism remains challenging [@Hare2014]. As I show in this
thesis, competing environmental forcing hypotheses are not necessarily mutually
exclusive and future research efforts should strive to understand the cumulative
effects and relative importance of a broad range of environmental forcing
hypotheses. In particular, increasing our understanding of how the relative
importance of different environmental pathways changes through space and time
may be an important component to estimating the current and future impacts of
climatic change on coastal ecosystems and the fish populations they support.

Environmental variability is an intrinsic element of coastal ecosystems and can
have profound impacts on ecosystem structure and function. As climatic processes
and ecosystem dynamics change at unprecedented rates, finding effective
strategies to integrate empirical information about natural and anthropogenic
forcing into management decisions may be critical to maintaining viable and
productive living marine resources. My fifth chapter highlights two potential
strategies that may prove effective, including dynamic in-season management of
commercial fisheries and scenario analysis. Ultimately, uncertainties about the
impacts of changing environmental conditions on living marine resources are
likely to always be present and effective decision-making in the face of this
uncertainty is vital to preserving the ecological, social, and economic benefits
generated by marine ecosystems.


<!--
The utility of improving our understanding of marine ecosystem dynamics is
partially dependent on how this understanding can be used to inform applied
management. As climatic processes and ecosystem dynamics change at unprecedented
rates, finding effective strategies to integrate empirical information about
natural and anthropogenic forcing into management decisions may be critical to
maintaining viable and productive living marine resources. My fifth chapter
highlights two potential strategies. First, implementing dynamic management
strategies, such as dynamic in-season management of commercial salmon fisheries,
may improve our ability to provide tactical management advice based on empirical
information about current ecosystem conditions. Second, scenario analysis and
other simulation modeling based strategies can be used to provide strategic
management advice that is informed by empirical information that may help in
developing policies that are robust to a wide range of potential future
ecosystem states. Ultimately, environmental variability is an intrinsic element
of coastal ecosystems and can have profound impacts on ecosystem structure and
function. As a consequence, uncertainties about the impacts of changing
environmental conditions on living marine resources are likely to always be
present and effective decision-making in the face of this uncertainty is vital
to preserving the ecological, social, and economic benefits generated by marine
ecosystems.
-->

