<!--
General Introduction
Michael Malick

~5-10 pages
-->

Date: 25 April 2016

# General Introduction

A critical challenge to maintaining viable and productive marine and anadromous
fish populations is understanding how environmental stochasticity affects
demographic rates of exploited populations. Although it is widely recognized
that variability in the structure and function of marine ecosystems, is in part,
driven by environmental stochasticity, the effects of environmental conditions
on higher-trophic-level species has been, and continues to be, debated in
fisheries science [@Walters1988a; @Skud1975]. At the core of the debate is
contention over the relative importance of environmental stochasticity and the
effects of fishing in controlling the dynamics of exploited fish populations.
For Pacific salmon, At least three lines of evidence suggest that environmental
stochasticity is indeed a leading driver of variability in stock
productivity. First, paleo-ecological studies have shown that fish populations
experienced large fluctuations in abundance prior to the onset of commercial
fishing [@Finney2000; @Rogers2013a]. Second, within-stock density-dependent
effects often explain little of the observed variability in stock productivity
[@Peterman1987a; @Szuwalski2015a]. Finally, shifts in the underlying mean
productivity of stocks often coincide with environmental regime shifts
[@Anderson1999a; @Chavez2003a].

Although these three lines of evidence provide a first suggestion of the
importance of environmental stochasticity, in many cases, separating the effects
of fishing and environmental stochasticity on exploited populations may not be
possible without extreme management actions
[@Walters2004b, pg. 176-177]. However, ignoring the effects of environmental
stochasticity on fish stock productivity may be costly from an economic,
management and ecological perspective. For example, ocean temperatures in the
Gulf of Maine have been increasing at an unprecedented rate over the past two
decades and a failure to account for the effects of this warming on cod stock
productivity likely contributed to the collapse of the Gulf of Maine cod fishery
[@Pershing2015]. Thus, avoiding similar undesirable management outcomes in the
future will likely require understanding and anticipating how environmental
change will impact marine and anadromous fish populations.

Detecting the effects of environmental stochasticity on fish populations is
difficult because fish population abundances are affected by multiple ecological
factors including dynamics internal to the population (e.g., density dependent
effects), predator-prey interactions, intra- and inter-specific competition, and
resource availability [@Ottersen2010a]. The effects of environmental
stochasticity on these drivers of productivity are not isolated, but instead,
changes in environmental conditions can have widespread effects across many
drivers. For example, changes in ocean temperature may simultaneously influence
the distribution of predator populations and the the availability of food
resources. Furthermore, environmental conditions may also have direct effects on
fish populations, for example, by influencing metabolic rates, swimming speeds,
and reproduction [CITE]. Therefore, understanding how environmental change affects
fish populations requires understanding the relative importance of competing
hypotheses of how fish populations respond to environmental change.


## Bottom-up forcing hypotheses

Mortality of Pacific salmon during the ocean life phase is widely recognized to
be size selective [@Parker1971a; @Holtby1990a; @McGurk1996a; @Moss2005a]
Consequently, faster growing salmon are expected to have reduced mortality rates
compared to slower growing conspecifics. A large fraction of marine mortality of
salmon (e.g., > 70%) is also thought to occur during the first year of ocean
residency, indicating that growth rates during this period are particularly
important for determining stock productivity
[@Parker1968a; @Peterman1985a; @Beamish2001a; @Wertheimer2007a] During this
critical period, foraging conditions, and in particular zooplankton abundances,
have been shown to be important factors in determining salmon growth rates, as
well as productivity, indicating that bottom-up forcing mechanisms likely have a
strong impact on Pacific salmon year class strength
[@Perry1996a; @Armstrong2005a].

A prevailing bottom-up forcing hypothesis in marine ecosystems posits that
vertical transport processes modulates surface primary production. In
particular, processes controlling water column stratification and the movement
of deep nutrient rich water to the surface are frequently cited as key elements
driving phytoplankton dynamics.  For example, in coastal upwelling areas, winds
drive surface waters offshore through Ekman transport, causing deep nutrient
rich water to upwell into the photic zone, providing the necessary nutrients
for primary production. Primary production occurring during the spring phytoplankton bloom
in turn affects secondary production, for instance, of zooplankton, thus
providing a pathway between vertical transport and salmon productivity.

Recently, an alternative bottom-up forcing hypothesis has emerged that suggests
that food resources available to juvenile salmon may also be driven by changes
in horizontal transport, i.e., ocean current patterns, that cause zooplankton to
be advected into or out of coastal areas.

For Pacific salmon, testing this vertical transport hypothesis
has mainly focused on the relationships between average upwelling intensity and
productivity of individual salmon stocks with mixed results.

A key assumption of this previous work on the links between vertical transport
and productivity of higher-trophic-level species is that there is a strong
relationship between phytoplankton dynamics and salmon productivity, however,
this assumption is largely untested. In the Northeast Pacific, phytoplankton
dynamics are primarily characterized by the spring phytoplankton bloom, which
has two primary modes of variability, the timing of the bloom and the intensity
of the bloom [CITE]. In chapter xxx, I explore the relationships between spring
bloom dynamics and salmon productivity by asking whether the phenology or
intensity of the spring phytoplankton bloom can explain variability in salmon
productivity. I find strong evidence for effects of the timing of the spring
bloom as well as phytoplankton biomass following the bloom on salmon
productivity throughout the North Pacific Rim.

Recently, an alternative bottom-up forcing hypothesis has emerged that suggests
that food resources available to juvenile salmon may also be driven by changes
in horizontal transport, i.e., ocean current patterns, that cause zooplankton to
be advected into or out of coastal areas.  In chapter xxx, I develop a method
for indexing variability in the NPC and estimate relationships between
variability in the positioning and intensity of the NPC on 16x North American
pink, chum, and sockeye salmon stocks. I find that stocks of these species in
the southern part of their North American range (i.e., throughout British
Columbia and Washington) are most strongly affected by variability in horizontal
ocean transport.


## Ecological pathways

In chapters xxx and xxx, I find evidence for two competing bottom-up forcing
hypotheses. However, these hypotheses are not mutually exclusive and may have
additive or multiplicative effects on salmon productivity. Because both the
vertical and horizontal transport hypotheses focus on ocean processes that occur
at the regional spatial scale, both hypotheses may be driving by larger scale
processes, such as climate processes. Indeed, hierarchy theory suggests that
large-scale processes likely 'set the stage' for smaller scale processes by
defining boundaries that constrain the smaller-scale processes [CITE].

It is widely recognized that the dynamics of the North Pacific are partially
controlled by inter-decadal fluctuations in large-scale climate and ocean
processes [@Mantua1997a; @Hare1999a].  The Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) and
the North Pacific Gyre Oscillation (NPGO) represent two of the major modes of
large-scale variability in the North Pacific [@Mantua2002a; @Di-Lorenzo2008a].
Fluctuations in these patterns, often referred to as regime shifts, can
substantially alter the physical and biological processes in the North Pacific
[@Chavez2003a]. A major reversal of the PDO in 1976/77 is one of the best
documented cases of the impacts of regime shifts on the dynamics of the North
Pacific [@Mantua1997a; @Anderson1999a; @Mueter2000a; @Hunt2002a].  Following
this regime shift, the species composition of the North Pacific shifted from a
crustacean-dominated system to a gadid and flatfish-dominated system
[@Anderson1999a; @Mueter2000a].  Moreover, the abundances of wild adult sockeye
salmon (O. nerka) and pink salmon (O. gorbuscha) in the North Pacific increased
by more than 65% after the regime shift [@Ruggerone2010a].

While, changes in large-spatial-scale climate patterns, such as the PDO, are
often correlated with indices of salmon productivity, there are many
intermediate-scale linkages between climate patterns and salmon productivity, as
well as multiple pathways that can connect climate and salmon
[@Mueter2002a; @Beamish2004b; @Drinkwater2010a]. For example, the vertical
transport hypothesis represents one pathway in which large-scale climate
processes may impact higher-trophic-level dynamics and the horizontal transport
hypothesis represents an alternative pathway. In chapter xxx, I estimate the
cumulative effects of these pathways on productivity of coho salmon in the
Northern California Current using Bayesian network. Results of this analysis
strongly indicated that both the vertical and horizontal transport pathways
simultaneously affect salmon productivity and indicate the need to account for
the cumulative effects of competing hypothesis of how environmental
stochasticity affects higher-trophic-level species.


## Managing for environmental change
- "Balancing harvest opportunities with conservation needs"


## Contributions

I am the sole author of chapters xxx and xxx (general introduction and
discussion, respectively) and these chapters are written in the first-person
singular. Chapters xxx-xxx are derived from either published manuscripts or
submitted manuscripts with co-authors and these chapters are written in the
first-person plural. For each of the chapters deriving from multi-authored
manuscripts (chapters xxx-xxx), I am the first-author of the work and performed
the data analysis and wrote the first draft of the text. These chapters,
however, benefited greatly from discussions, editing, and comments from the
co-author. The original published sources of these chapters are provided at the
beginning of each chapter. The initial ideas for chapter (bloom) were developed
by myself, Randall Peterman, Franz Mueter and Sean Cox. Chapter (npc) builds on
ideas originally presented in an unpublished manuscript by Randall Peterman,
Franz Mueter, and Brigitte Dorner. The idea for chapter (bn) came out of
discussions between myself and Randall Peterman following a presentation on
Bayesian networks by Catherine Michielsens. The ideas presented in chapter
(policy) were initially developed by myself, Murray Rutherford, and Sean Cox.

# References
