---
title:  Environmental forcing of Pacific salmon population dynamics
author: Michael Malick
date:   22 Nov 2016
---

<!--
Title 1: Ecological drivers of spatial and temporal variability in Pacific
         salmon productivity

Title 2: Ecological pathways as drivers of Pacific salmon productivity

Title 3: Ecological pathways as drivers of Pacific salmon population ecology
-->


# General Introduction

Environmental change can have profound impacts on the provisioning of ecosystem
services generated by marine and coastal ecosystems. Yet, deep uncertainties
about the coupling among climatic change, physical and biological ocean
processes, and the productivity[^1] of higher-trophic-level species limits our
ability to anticipate or quickly detect impacts from environmental change on
commercially valuable species. These uncertainties contribute to risks, which
have implications for conservation, harvest management, and users of the
resource. Fundamental to minimizing uncertainties about the effects of
environmental change on higher-trophic-level species is developing a
quantitative understanding about how perturbations in large-scale climatic and
atmospheric conditions propagate to regional and local scale changes in the
population dynamics of exploited species. In this thesis, I aim to add to that
quantitative understanding by applying a cross-system comparative approach to
examine environmental forcing pathways linking climatic and ocean processes to
dynamics of Pacific salmon (*Oncorhynchus* spp.) populations in the Northeast
Pacific Ocean.

[^1]: Throughout this thesis, the term productivity refers to the per capita
      growth rate for a population. For Pacific salmon, productivity is
      estimated as the number of recruits produced per spawner.


## Cross-scale environmental change

Environmental change in marine and coastal ecosystems can arise from
anthropogenic sources or natural environmental stochasticity and can manifest as
gradual or abrupt changes in mean conditions or changes in the frequency or
distribution of extreme events. For example, gradual changes in climate systems
over the past five decades due to increased carbon dioxide concentrations in the
atmosphere have resulted in warmer mean atmosphere and ocean temperatures,
decreased snow and ice pack, rising sea levels, changes in precipitation
patterns, increased ocean acidification, and increased frequency of extreme
temperature events [@IPCC2013a]. The inter-decadal rate of change for many of
these abiotic ecosystem components is unprecedented with equally rapid changes
also being observed for biological processes including shifts in phenology,
species distributions, and fish stock productivity [@IPCC2013a; @Taylor2008a;
@Pinsky2013; @Peterman2012].

Concurrent with climate and ecosystem changes from anthropogenic sources are
changes resulting from natural climate variability. In the Northeast Pacific,
large-scale climate patterns, e.g., the Pacific Decadal Oscillation and North
Pacific Gyre Oscillation, at least partially control the dynamics of marine and
coastal ecosystems. Fluctuations in these patterns, often referred to as regime
shifts, can substantially alter the structure and function of ecosystems that
comprise the Northeast Pacific [@Chavez2003a]. For instance, a rapid ecological
shift occurred in response to a climatic regime shift in 1976/1977 (i.e., the
Pacific Decadal Oscillation shifted from a "cool regime" to a "warm regime"),
which resulted in a taxonomic reorganization in the Northeast Pacific where the
abundances of wild adult sockeye salmon (*O. nerka*) and pink salmon (*O.
gorbuscha*) increased by more than 65% following the regime shift
[@Ruggerone2010a; @Anderson1999a; @Mueter2000a].

For Pacific salmon, effects of environmental change due to perturbations in
climatic conditions are largely hypothesized to influence survival of
pre-recruit life stages. In particular, the first year of marine residency for
Pacific salmon is considered a critical period, i.e., mortality during this
life-stage can have a disproportionately large affect on overall stock
productivity compared to other life-stages [@Parker1968a; @Peterman1985a;
@Beamish2001a; @Wertheimer2007a]. Although both bottom-up[^2] and top-down[^3]
forcing likely contribute to mortality during this critical period, two pieces
of evidence suggest that processes controlling food resource availability are
particularly important. First, juvenile salmon mortality during the early marine
life stage is size selective, with larger juveniles tending to survive to adult
life stages in higher proportions than smaller juvenile salmon [@Parker1971a;
@Holtby1990a; @McGurk1996a; @Moss2005a]. Second, growth rates during the early
marine life-stage are strongly and positively associated with overall marine
survival rates [@Cross2008a; @Duffy2011; @Farley2007b]. Together, this evidence
suggests that large-scale climatic perturbations likely have a strong impact on
Pacific salmon year class strength through bottom-up forcing pathways
[@Perry1996a; @Armstrong2005a].

[^2]: The term 'bottom-up forcing' is used throughout this thesis to describe
      regulation of ecosystem structure and function through processes that
      affect the base of the food chain, such as nutrient supply and primary
      production.

[^3]: The term 'top-up forcing' is used throughout this thesis to describe
      regulation of ecosystem structure and function occuring through predation.



## Environmental forcing pathways

A prevailing bottom-up forcing pathway in marine ecosystems posits that vertical
transport processes mediate the effects of climate variability on phytoplankton
dynamics in coastal ecosystems and subsequently, food resource availability for
juvenile Pacific salmon (Fig. 1) [@DiLorenzo2013b; @Rykaczewski2008a;
@Ware1991a]. In particular, atmospheric and ocean processes controlling water
column stability and the near surface nutrient supply are frequently cited as
key elements driving phytoplankton dynamics in coastal Northeast Pacific
ecosystems [@Henson2007a; @Gargett1997a]. For example, in coastal upwelling
areas, winds drive surface waters offshore through Ekman dynamics, causing
nutrient rich subsurface water to upwell into the euphotic zone, providing
necessary nutrients for primary production [@Huyer1983]. In turn, this primary
production provides grazing opportunities for copepods and other zooplankton,
which are a critical food resource for juvenile Pacific salmon [@Armstrong2008a;
@Beauchamp2007a; @Brodeur2007a]. Over the past two decades, considerable
evidence has indicated strong connections between climate variability, vertical
ocean transport processes, and phytoplankton dynamics [@Chenillat2012;
@Polovina1995a; @Henson2007a; @Henson2007b; @Stabeno2004a; @Weingartner2002a].
However, relationships between lower-trophic-level process, such as
phytoplankton dynamics in coastal ecosystems, and productivity of Pacific salmon
populations largely remains an untested assumption. In chapter 1, I investigate
this assumption of the vertical transport hypothesis by asking whether the
phenology or intensity of the spring phytoplankton bloom can explain variability
in salmon productivity.

<!-- In particular, I use satellite derived chl-a estimates
to examine the effects of spring bloom initiation date and phytoplankton biomass
on productivity of 27 pink salmon populations.-->

Recently, evidence for an alternative bottom-up forcing pathway has emerged,
suggesting that horizontal ocean transport may be equally important as vertical
transport in mediating the effects of climate variability on
higher-trophic-level species [@DiLorenzo2013b]. This horizontal transport
hypothesis proposes that food resources available to juvenile salmon is driven
by climate-induced changes in horizontal transport processes, e.g., ocean
currents or eddies, that cause zooplankton or other weakly/passive drifters to
be advected into or out of coastal ecosystems (Fig. 1). For example, off the
central Oregon Coast, research has indicated that the negative phase of the
Pacific Decadal Oscillation is associated with increased advection of
large-bodied lipid-rich zooplankton into the region from northern areas, which
in turn is associated with increased marine survival of coho salmon (*O.
kisutch*) [@Keister2011a; @Bi2011a]. Beyond the Northern California Current
area, however, the effects of variability in horizontal ocean transport on
Pacific salmon productivity are largely untested. In chapter 2, I examine the
effects of two modes of variability in horizontal ocean transport in the
Northeast Pacific on productivity of 163 North American pink, chum (*O. keta*),
and sockeye salmon stocks.

Although the vertical and horizontal transport pathways are individually
appealing to explain how climate forcing downscales to affect regional and local
scale dynamics of higher-trophic-level species, these hypotheses are not
mutually exclusive and may have additive or multiplicative effects on salmon
productivity. In particular, regional-scale vertical and horizontal transport
processes both mediate the effects of large-scale climate variability on lower-
and higher-trophic level species. Thus, perturbations to climatic systems from
anthropogenic or natural sources may simultaneously influence regional-scale
vertical and horizontal transport pathways. Indeed, the Pacific Decadal
Oscillation has been shown to influence both ocean current patterns in the
Northern California Current ecosystem and affect the magnitude of
upwelling-favorable winds in the region [@Keister2011a; @Chhak2007]. The
coupling among different environmental pathways thus creates a complex
ecological network that links climate patterns, ocean conditions, and salmon
population dynamics. Estimating the cumulative effects and relative importance
of the pathways within this network is a necessary component of understanding
how environmental change impacts higher-trophic-level species. In chapter 3, I
estimate the cumulative effects of these pathways on productivity of coho salmon
in the Northern California Current using Bayesian network.


## Managing for environmental change

A better understanding of how environmental forcing impacts salmon populations
is a necessary but not sufficient condition for maintaining viable and
productive salmon stocks. We also need to develop a parallel understanding of
how these impacts interact with other anthropogenic disturbances, such as
commercial harvesting, and how this information can be incorporated into
management decisions [@Link2002a]. Increasingly, management of living marine
resources is moving toward ecosystem-based approaches to management that shift
the focus of management from a single-species to maintaining critical components
of ecosystem structure and function [@Grumbine1994; @Murawski2007a; @Long2015].
Implementing ecosystem-based management approaches requires defining boundaries
that delimit the spatial extent of the decision-making process and most of the
research examining the challenges to implementing ecosystem-based management
assume that the anthropogenic (or natural) disturbances occur within the human
defined boundaries of the decision-making area [@Engler2015; @Yaffee1999].
However, for highly migratory marine and anadromous fish species, these impacts
can occur across a continuum of spatial scales that frequently extend beyond the
boundaries of the ecosystem-based management area [@Dallimer2015]. For example,
management actions, such as decisions to increased commercial harvest, in
locations that are geographically distance from the ecosystem-based management
area may strongly impact the supply of ecosystem services provided by a
migratory species within the bounds of the ecosystem-based management area. In
chapter 4, I confront this assumption by examining challenges associated with
integrating highly migratory Pacific salmon into regional and local scale
ecosystem-based management policies and outline potential strategies to overcome
the challenges.


## Statement of interdisciplinarity

The research presented in this thesis includes two levels of
interdisciplinarity. First is the incorporation of research ideas, perspectives,
and approaches from both oceanography and fisheries. Although both fields are
firmly rooted in the natural sciences, the research approaches and the types of
questions important to researchers in both fields have diverged over time
[@Platt2007a]. The first three chapters of my research attempt to bring together
some of the knowledge and research questions important to both fisheries
scientists and oceanographers. The second level of interdisciplinarity involves
a bridge between the natural and social sciences. One-quarter of the research
presented in this thesis is focused on this bridging by taking a policy
perspective in order to answer an important fisheries question.


## Contributions

I am the sole author of the general introduction and discussion and these
chapters are written in the first-person singular. Chapters 1--4 are derived
from either published manuscripts or submitted manuscripts with co-authors and
these chapters are written in the first-person plural. For each of the chapters
deriving from multi-authored manuscripts (chapters 1--4), I am the first-author
of the work and performed the data analysis and wrote the first draft of the
text. These chapters, however, benefited greatly from discussions, editing, and
comments from the co-author. The original published sources of these chapters
are provided at the beginning of each chapter. The initial ideas for chapter 1
were developed by myself, Randall Peterman, Franz Mueter and Sean Cox. Chapter 2
builds on ideas originally presented in an unpublished manuscript by Randall
Peterman, Franz Mueter, and Brigitte Dorner. The main idea for chapter 3 came
out of discussions between myself and Randall Peterman following a presentation
on using Bayesian networks for ecological research by Catherine Michielsens. The
ideas presented in chapter 4 were initially developed by myself, Murray
Rutherford, and Sean Cox.

<!--
I am the sole author of chapters xxx and xxx (general introduction and
discussion, respectively) and these chapters are written in the first-person
singular. Chapters xxx-xxx are derived from either published manuscripts or
submitted manuscripts with co-authors and these chapters are written in the
first-person plural. For each of the chapters deriving from multi-authored
manuscripts (chapters xxx-xxx), I am the first-author of the work and performed
the data analysis and wrote the first draft of the text. These chapters,
however, benefited greatly from discussions, editing, and comments from the
co-author. The original published sources of these chapters are provided at the
beginning of each chapter. The initial ideas for chapter (bloom) were developed
by myself, Randall Peterman, Franz Mueter and Sean Cox. Chapter (npc) builds on
ideas originally presented in an unpublished manuscript by Randall Peterman,
Franz Mueter, and Brigitte Dorner. The main idea for chapter (bn) came out of
discussions between myself and Randall Peterman following a presentation on
using Bayesian networks for ecological research by Catherine Michielsens. The
ideas presented in chapter (policy) were initially developed by myself, Murray
Rutherford, and Sean Cox.
-->

# References

