--- 
header-includes:
    - \usepackage{graphicx}
    - \usepackage{float}
---





\vspace*{2cm}

\begin{center}

{\LARGE Supplementary Materials}

\vspace{1cm}

{ \large Linking phytoplankton phenology to salmon productivity along a
north/south gradient in the Northeast Pacific Ocean}

\vspace{1cm}

Michael J. Malick, Sean P. Cox, Franz J. Mueter, and Randall M. Peterman

\vspace{1cm}

6 Jan 2015
\end{center}

\newpage



### A. Comparison of SeaWiFS and MODIS chlorophyll-a data products

Lengthy periods of missing data in 2008-2010 for the SeaWiFS chl-a data set made
these years of data unsuitable for calculating an initiation date of the spring
bloom (Fig. S1). Therefore, we investigated the feasibility of combining the
SeaWiFS and MODIS chl-a data products. We used Pearson correlation coefficients
between the two time series of log~10~ transformed data, root mean squared
log~10~ error (RMSE), and log~10~ bias (mean of the absolute value of log~10~
transformed MODIS chl-a values minus SeaWiFS values) to quantify the covariation
and differences between the SeaWiFS and MODIS data sets for the first five
complete years of overlap, 2003-2007 (O'Reilly et al. 2000; Gregg and Casey
2004; Zhang et al. 2006). We performed two primary comparisons. First, to assess
the similarities between the data sets across the entire study region and time
period, we calculated the average of each of the three metrics (i.e., correlation
coefficients, RMSE, and log~10~ bias) for all grid cells and years. Second, to
assess differences among years, we calculated the averages of the RMSE, as well
as log~10~ bias metrics for all grid cells by year.

The average correlation between the MODIS and SeaWiFS chl-a data sets across
grid cells was 0.87, with correlations for individual grid cells ranging from
0.69 to 0.95. The RMSE of the differences between the SeaWiFS and MODIS chl-a
data sets over all years and grid cells was 0.16 and annually it ranged from
0.09 in 2007 to 0.22 in 2006 (Fig. S2). These RMSE values are slightly smaller
than RMSE values of the differences between satellite chl-a estimates and field
sampled chl-a data (RMSE of 0.22; O'Reilly et al. 2000), indicating our RMSE
values are within the range of background noise of the algorithm used to
produced the chl-a estimates. The log~10~ bias of MODIS data compared to SeaWiFS
data over all grid cells and years was 0.012 and annually ranged from 0.04 in
2004 to -0.01 in 2007 (Fig. S2) with 79% of absolute differences being less than
0.1 and 90% of differences being less than 0.2. These log~10~ bias values are
generally small differences given the estimated chl-a values (Fig. S5). In
addition, the log~10~ bias values indicate that the MODIS values are slightly
higher than the SeaWiFS values at this temporal composite and spatial resolution
for most years. 

Our comparison of the SeaWiFS and MODIS chl-a data products concurs with values
reported by other researchers over the same time and a similar region (Waite and
Mueter 2013). Given the strong covariation, low RMSE, and small log~10~ bias
between chl-a data products, we deemed it appropriate to concatenate the SeaWiFS
and MODIS data products for our study region without further data processing.



### References

\hangindent=1.27cm
\noindent Gregg, W.W., and Casey, N.W. 2004. Global and regional evaluation of the SeaWiFS
chlorophyll data set. Remote Sens. Environ. **93**: 463–479. 
doi: [10.1016/j.rse.2003.12.012](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2003.12.012).

\hangindent=1.27cm
\noindent O’Reilly, J.E., Maritorena, S., O’Brian, M.C., Siegel, D.A., Toole,
D., Menzies, D., Smith, R.C., Mueller, J.L., Mitchell, B.G., Kahru, and 
others. 2000. SeaWiFS postlaunch calibration and validation analyses, Part 3.
NASA Technical Memorandum 2000-206892, Volume 11.

\hangindent=1.27cm
\noindent Waite, J.N., and Mueter, F.J. 2013. Spatial and temporal variability
of chlorophyll-a concentrations in the coastal Gulf of Alaska, 1998-2011, using
cloud-free reconstruction of SeaWiFS and MODIS-Aqua data. Prog. Oceanogr.
**116**: 179–192.
doi:
[10.1016/j.pocean.2013.07.006](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pocean.2013.07.006).

\hangindent=1.27cm
\noindent Zhang, C., Hu, C., Shang, S., Müller-Karger, F.E., Li, Y., Dai, M.,
Huang, B., Ning, X., and Hong, H. 2006. Bridging between SeaWiFS and MODIS for
continuity of chlorophyll-a concentration assessments off Southeastern China.
Remote Sens. Environ. **102**: 250–263.
doi: [10.1016/j.rse.2006.02.015](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2006.02.015).


\newpage





### B. Hatchery pink salmon marine survival

To further test the effects of the spring bloom initiation date and chl-a
concentrations on pink salmon dynamics, we compared the three chl-a metrics to
pink salmon marine survival rates for three hatchery stocks located around the
Gulf of Alaska (Armin F. Koernig, Kitoi Bay,  and Port Armstrong). Marine
survival rates for each hatchery stock were estimated for release years
1998-2010 by dividing the total adult pink salmon returns resulting from
juveniles released in year $t$ by the total number of juvenile pink salmon
released into marine waters in year $t$. To estimate the association between
each of the three chl-a metrics and marine survival, we calculated Pearson
correlation coefficients between marine survival rates and the spring bloom
initiation date, average April-May chl-a concentration, and average
July-September chl-a concentration. Like the analysis in the main text, each
chl-a metric and the spring bloom initiation date were averaged over all grid
cells within 250 km of the ocean release location for each hatchery.

Marine survival rates for all three hatcheries were negatively correlated with
the spring bloom initiation date (Fig. S4), which corresponds with our
hierarchical model results that indicated a negative region-wide effect of the
spring bloom initiation on salmon productivity for northern stocks. The
correlations between marine survival rates and spring chl-a concentration were
mostly positive with two positive correlations and a negative correlation (Fig.
S4), which corresponds with the results from our single-stock and multi-stock
models for northern stocks that indicated a weak positive region-wide effect.
The correlations for the late summer chl-a concentration diverged from our
single-stock and multi-stock model results with two positive correlations and a
negative correlation (Fig. S4), however, the correlations were weak for all
three hatcheries (less than 0.35 for all hatcheries). On average, the absolute
values of correlations between marine survival and the spring bloom were higher
(average correlation = -0.34) than for the spring chl-a concentration (average
correlation = 0.27) and the late summer chl-a concentration (average correlation
= 0.23).

Results of the hatchery marine survival analysis broadly agreed with the results
from the single-stock and multi-stock models in the main text. In particular,
the hatchery results support our conclusions that (1) an early spring bloom
timing is associated with increased productivity for northern pink salmon
stocks, and (2) the spring bloom initiation date is more strongly associated
with pink salmon productivity than phytoplankton biomass.

\newpage

## Supplemental Figures

\setlength{\parindent}{0pt} 


\begin{figure}[!h]
\centering
\includegraphics{./figures/S_chl_perc_na.pdf}
\end{figure}

**Fig. S1.** Percent of all grid cells with missing chl-a data by
year (see Fig. 1 of the main text) for SeaWiFS (left panel) and MODIS (right
panel) chl-a data. Green line with closed circles indicates 1-day composites,
blue line with filled squares indicates 5-day composites, and red line with
filled triangles indicates 8-day composites.

\newpage


\begin{figure}[!h]
\centering
\includegraphics{./figures/S_compare_rmse_bias.pdf}
\end{figure}

**Fig. S2.** Annual values for the root mean squared log~10~ error
(RMSE; top panel) and log~10~ bias (bottom panel) calculated as MODIS minus
corresponding SeaWiFS chl-a value. 

\newpage


\begin{figure}[!h]
\centering
\includegraphics{./figures/S_lm_hist.pdf}
\end{figure}

**Fig. S3.** Histograms of the estimated $\alpha$ and $\beta$ coefficients for
the single stock models (eq. 2) and estimated probability density functions
(smooth solid black lines) for bloom initiation date (top row), average spring
chl-a concentrations (middle row), and average late summer chl-a concentrations
(bottom row).

\newpage


\begin{figure}[!h]
\centering
\includegraphics{./figures/S_hatchery_cor.pdf}
\end{figure}

**Fig. S4.** Correlation matrix showing the Pearson correlation coefficients
between each of the hatchery marine survival time series and the three chl-a
metrics (\* indicates significantly different from zero at P < 0.05). 
<!-- * -->

\newpage

\begin{figure}[!h]
\centering
\includegraphics{./figures/S_chl_month_avg.pdf}
\end{figure}

**Fig. S5.** Average monthly log~10~ transformed chlorophyll-a
values across all grid cells and years.



